AN-1 Analytic sets For a discrete-time process{X n }adapted to a filtration{F n :n∈N}, the prime example of a stopping time isτ=inf{n∈N:X n ∈B}, the first time the process enters some Borel setB. For a continuous-time process{X t } adapted to a filtration{F t :t∈R + }, it is less obvious whether the analogously defined random variableτ=inf{t:X t ∈B}is a stopping time. (Also it is not necessarily true thatX τ is a point ofB.) The most satisfactory resolution of the underlying measure-theoretic problem requires some theory about analytic sets. What follows is adapted from Dellacherie & Meyer (1978, Chapter III, paras 1–33, 44–45). The following key result will be proved in this handout. < 1>Theorem.Let A be aB(R + )⊗F-measurable subset ofR + ×and let (,F,P)be a complete probability space. Then: (i) The projectionπ  A:={ω∈:(t,ω)∈Afor sometinR + }belongs toF. (ii) There exists anF-measurable random variableψ:→R + ∪ {∞} such thatψ(ω) <∞and(ψ(ω), ω)∈A for almost allωin the projectionπ  A, andψ(ω)=∞forω/∈π  A. Remark. The mapψin (ii) is called a measurable cross-section of the setA. Note that the cross-sectionA ω :={t∈ R + :(t,ω)∈A}is empty whenω/∈π  A. It would be impossible to have(ψ(ω), ω)∈Afor such anω. The proofs will exploit the properties of the collection of analytic subsets of \[0,∞\]×. As you will see, the analytic sets have properties analogous to those of sigma-fields—stability under the formation of countable unions and intersections. They are not necessarily stable under complements, but they do have an extra stability property for projections that is not shared by measurable sets. The Theorem is made possible by the fact that the product-measurable subsets ofR + ×are all analytic. 1. Notation A collectionDof subsets of a setXwith∅∈Dis called apavingonX.A paving that is closed under the formation of unions of countable subcollections is said to be a∪c-paving. For example, the setD σ of all unions of countable subcollections ofDis a∪c-paving. Similarly, the setD δ of all intersections of countable subcollections ofDis a∩c-paving. Note thatD σδ :=(D σ ) δ is a ∩c-paving but it need not be stable under∪c. LetTbe a compact metric space equipped with the pavingK(T)of compact subsets and its Borel sigma-fieldB(T), which is generated byK(T). Remark. In fact,K(T)is also the class of closed subsets of the compactT. For Theorem<1>, the appropriate space will beT=\[0,∞\]. The sets in B(R + )⊗Fcan be identified with sets inB(T)⊗F. The compactness ofTwill be needed to derive good properties for the projection mapπ  :T×→. An important role will be played by the∩f-paving K(T)×F:={K×F:K∈K(T),F∈F}onT× and by the pavingRthat consists of all finite unions of sets fromK(T)×F. That is,Ris the∪f-closure ofK(T)×F. Note (Problem \[1\]) thatRis a Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard AN-2 (∪f,∩f)-paving onT×. Also, ifR=∪ i K i ×F i then, assuming we have discarded any terms for whichK i =∅, π  (R)=∪ i π   K i ×F i  =∪ i F i ∈F. Remark. If EandFare sigma-fields, note the distinction between E×F={E×F:E∈E,F∈F} and E⊗F:=σ(E×F). 2. Why compact sets are needed Many of the measurability difficulties regarding projections stem from the fact that they do not “preserve set-theoretic operations” in the way that inverse images do:π   ∪ i A i  =∪ i π  A i butπ   ∩ i A i  ⊆∩ i π  A i . Compactness of cross-sections will allow us to strengthen the last inclusion to an equality. < 2>Lemma.\[Finite intersection property\] SupposeK 0 is a collection of compact subsets of a metric spaceXfor which each finite subcollection has a nonempty also works for any Hausdorff topological space intersection. Then∩K 0 =∅. Proof. Arbitrarily choose aK 0 fromK 0 .If∩K 0 were empty then the sets {K c :K∈K 0 }would be an open cover ofK 0 . Extract a finite subcover ∪ m i=1 K c i . Then∩ m i=0 K i =∅, a contradiction. < 3>Corollary.Suppose{A i :i∈N}is a decreasing sequence of subsets of T×for which eachω-cross-section K i (ω):={t∈T:(t,ω)∈A i }is compact. Thenπ   ∩ i∈N A i  =∩ i∈N π  A i . Proof. Supposeω∈∩ i∈N π  A i . Then{K i (ω):i∈N}is a decreasing sequence of compact, nonempty (becauseω∈π  A i ) subsets ofT. The finite intersection property of compact sets ensures that there is atin∩ i∈N K i (ω). The point(t,ω)belongs to∩ i∈N A i andω∈π   ∩ i A i  . Remark. For our applications, we will be dealing only with sequences, but the argument also works for more general collections of sets with compact cross-sections. <4>Corollary.If B=∩ i∈N R i with R i ∈Rthenπ  B=∩ i∈N π  R i ∈F. Proof. Note that the cross-section of eachR-set is a finite union of compact sets, which is compact. Without loss of generality, we may assume that R 1 ⊇R 2 ⊇.... Invoke Corollary<3>. 3. Measurability of some projections For whichB∈B(T)⊗Fis it true thatπ  (B)∈F? From Corollary<4>, we know that it is true ifBbelongs toR δ . The following properties of outer measures (see Problem \[2\]) will allow us to extend this nice behavior to sets inR σδ : (i) IfA 1 ⊆A 2 thenP ∗ (A 1 )≤P ∗ (A 2 ) (ii) If{A i :i∈N}is an increasing sequence thenP ∗  A i  ↑P ∗  ∪ i∈N A i  . (iii) If{F i :i∈N}⊆Fis a decreasing sequence then P ∗  F i  =PF i ↓P  ∩ i∈N F i  =P ∗  ∩ i∈N F i  . For each subsetDofT×define ∗ (D):=P ∗ π  D, the outer measure of the projection ofDonto.IfD i ↑Dthenπ  D i ↑π  D.IfR i ∈Rand Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard AN-3 R i ↓Bthenπ  R i ∈Fandπ  R i ↓π  B∈F. The properties forP ∗ carry over to analogous properties for ∗ : (i) IfD 1 ⊆D 2 then ∗ (D 1 )≤ ∗ (D 2 ) (ii) If{D i :i∈N}is an increasing sequence then ∗  D i  ↑ ∗  ∪ i∈N D i  . (iii) If{R i :i∈N}⊆Ris a decreasing sequence then ∗  R i  ↓  ∗  ∩ i∈N R i  . With just these properties, we can show thatπ  behaves well on a much larger collection of sets thanR. < 5>Lemma.If A∈R σδ then ∗ (B)=sup{ ∗ (B):B∈R δ }. Consequently, the setπ  A belongs toF. Proof. WriteAas∩ i∈N D i withD i =∪ j∈N R ij ∈R σ .AsRis∪f-stable, we may assume thatR ij is increasing injfor each fixedi. Suppose ∗ (A)>Mfor some constantM. Invoke (ii) for the sequence {AR 1j }, which increases toAD 1 =A, to find an indexj 1 for which the setR 1 :=R 1j 1 has ∗  AR 1  >M. The sequence{AR 1 R 2j }increases toAR 1 D 2 =AR 1 . Again by (ii), there exists an indexj 2 for which the setR 2 =R 2j 2 has ∗ (AR 1 R 2 )>M. And so on. In this way we construct setsR i inRfor which  ∗ (R 1 R 2 ...R n )≥ ∗ (AR 1 R 2 ...R n )>M for everyn. The setB M :=∩ i∈N R i belongs toR δ ; it is a subset of∩ i∈N D i =A; and, by (iii), ∗ (B)≥M. By Corollary< 4>, the setB M projects to a setF M :=π  B M inFand hencePF M = ∗ B≥M. The setπ  Ais inner regular, in the sense that P ∗ π  A= ∗ A=sup{PF:π  A⊇F∈F} It follows (Problem \[2\]) that the setπ  Abelongs toF. The properties shared byP ∗ and ∗ are so useful that they are given a name. <6>Definition.SupposeSis a paving on a set S. A functiondefined for all subsets of S and taking values in\[−∞,∞\]is said to be a ChoquetS-capacity if it satisfies the following three properties. (i) If D 1 ⊆D 2 then(D 1 )≤(D 2 ) (ii) If{D i :i∈N}is an increasing sequence then  D i  ↑  ∪ i∈N D i  . (iii) If{S i :i∈N}⊆Sis a decreasing sequence then  S i  ↓  ∩ i∈N S i  . The outer measureP ∗ is a ChoquetF-capacity defined for the subsets of. Moreover, ifis any ChoquetF-capacity defined for the subsets of then ∗ (D):=(π  D)is a ChoquetR-capacity defined for the subsets ofT×. The argument from Lemma< 5>essentially shows that ifA∈R σδ then ∗ (B)=sup{ ∗ (B):B∈R δ }for every such ∗ , whether defined viaP ∗ or not. 4. Analytic sets The paving ofS-analytic sets can be defined for any pavingSon a setS.For our purposes, the most important case will beS=T×withS=R. Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard AN-4 < 7>Definition.SupposeSis a paving on a set S. A subset A of S is said to beS-analytic if there exists a compact metric space E and a subset D in  K(E)×S  σδ for which A=π S D. WriteA(S)for the set of allS-analytic subsets of S. Remark. Note thatR σδ =( K(T)×F) σδ . Theσtakes care of the∪f operation needed to generate RfromK(T)×F. TheR-analytic sets are also called K(T)× F-analytic sets. In fact, it is possible to find a singleEthat defines all theS-analytic subsets, but that possibility is not important for my purposes. What is important is the fact thatA(S)is a(∪c,∩c)-paving: see Problem \[3\]. WhenEis another compact metric space, Tychonoff’s theorem (see Dudley 1989, Section 2.2, for example) ensures not only that the product space E×Tis a compact metric space but also thatK(E)×K(T)⊆K(E×T). Lemma< 5>, applied to  T:=E×Tinstead ofTand with  Rthe ∪f-closure ofK(E×T)×F, implies that < 8>π  D∈Ffor eachDin  R σδ . Hereπ  projectsE×T×onto. We also have  R σδ ⊇  K(E)×K(T)×F  σδ =  K(E)×R  σδ whereRis the∪f-closure ofK(T)×F, as in Section 3. As a special case of property< 8>we have < 9>π  D∈Ffor eachDin  K(E)×R  σδ . Writeπ  as a composition of projectionπ  ◦π T× , whereπ T× projects E×T×ontoT×.AsEranges over all compact metric spaces andD ranges over all the  K(E)×R  σδ sets, the projectionsA:=π T× Drange over allR-analytic subsets ofT×. Property< 9>is equivalent to the assertion < 10>π  A∈Ffor allA∈A(R). In fact, the method used to prove Lemma< 5>together with an analogue of the argument just outlined establishes an approximation theorem for analytic sets and general Choquet capacities. < 11>Theorem.SupposeSis a(∪f,∩f)-paving on a set S and Letis a ChoquetS-capacity on S. Then(A)=sup{(B):A⊇B∈S δ }.for each A inA(S). To prove assertion (i) of Theorem< 1>, we have only to check that B(T)⊗F⊆A(R) for the special case whereT=\[0,∞\]. By Problem \[3\],A(R)is a(∪c,∩c)- paving. It follows easily that H:={H∈B(T)⊗F:H∈A(R)andH c ∈A(R)} is a sigma-field onT×. EachK×FwithK∈K(T)andF∈Fbelongs toHbecauseK(T)×F⊆R⊆A(R)and (K×F) c =  K×F c  +  K c ×  K c =∪ i∈N {t:d(t,K)≥1/i}∈K(T) σ It follows thatH=σ(K(T)×F)=B(T)⊗FandB(T)⊗F⊆A(R). Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard AN-5 5. Existence of measurable cross-sections The general Theorem<11>is exactly what we need to prove part (ii) of Theorem< 1>. Once again identifyAwith anR-analytic subset ofT×, where T=\[0,∞\]. The result is trivial ifα 1 :=Pπ  A=0, so assumeα 1 >0. Invoke Theorem< 11>for theR-capacity defined by ∗ (D)=P ∗ (π  D). Find a subset withA⊇B 1 ∈R δ andP  π  B 1  = ∗ (B 1 )≥α 1 /2. Define ψ 1 (ω):=inf{t∈R + :(t,ω)∈B 1 }. Because the setB 1 has compact cross-sections, the infimum is actually achieved for eachωinπ  B 1 .Forω/∈π  B 1 the infimum equals∞. Define A 2 :={(t,ω)∈A:ω/∈π  B 1 }=A∩  T×(π  B 1 ) c  Note thatA 2 ∈A(R)andα 2 :=Pπ  A 2 ≤α 1 /2. Without loss of generality supposeα 2 >0. Find a subset withA 2 ⊇B 2 ∈R δ andP  π  B 2  = ∗ (B 2 )≥ α 2 /2. Defineψ 2 (ω)as the first hitting time onB 2 . T π Ω A A B 1 B 2 π Ω A 2 And so on. The sets{π  B i :i∈N}are disjoint, withF:=∪ i∈N π  B i a subset ofπ  A. By constructionα i ↓0, which ensures thatP  (π  A)\\F  =0. Ifα i =0for somei, the con- struction requires only finitely many steps. Defineψ:=inf i∈N ψ i .OnBwe have(ψ(ω), ω)∈A. 6. Problems \[1\] SupposeSis a paving (on a setS), which is∩f-stable. LetS ∪f consists of the set of all unions of finite collections of sets fromS. Show thatS ∪f is a (∪f,∩f)-paving. Hint: Show that(∪ i S i )∩(∪ j T j )=∪ i,j (S i ∩T j ). \[2\] The outer measure of a setA⊆is defined asPA:=inf{PF:A⊆F∈F}. (i) Show that the infimum is achieved, that is, there exists anF∈Ffor whichA⊆FandP ∗ A=PF. Hint: Consider the intersection of a sequence of sets for whichPF n ↓P ∗ A. (ii) Suppose{D n :n∈N}is an increasing sequence of sets (not necessarilyF-measurable) with unionD. Show thatP ∗ D n ↑P ∗ D. Hint: Find sets withD i ⊆F i ∈FandP ∗ D i =PF i . Show that ∩ i≥n F i ↑F⊇DandPF≤sup i∈N P ∗ D i . (iii) SupposeDis a subset offor whichP ∗ D=sup{PF 0 :D⊇F 0 ∈F}. Show thatDbelongs to theP-completion ofF(or toFitself ifFis P-complete). Hint: Find setsFandF i inFfor whichF i ⊆D⊆F andPF i ↑P ∗ D=PF. Show thatF\\  ∪ i∈N F i  has zeroP-measure. \[3\] Suppose{A α :α∈N}⊆A(S). Show that∪ α A a ∈A(S)and∩ α A a ∈A(S),by the following steps. Recall that there exist compact metric spaces{E α :α∈N}, each equipped with its pavingK α of compact subsets, and setsD α ∈  K α ×S  σδ for whichA α =π S D α . D&M Theorem 3.8 Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard AN-6 (i) DefineE:=× α∈N E α andE −β =× α∈N\\{β} E α . Show thatEis a compact metric space. (ii) Define  D:=D α ×E −α . Show that  D α ∈  K(E)×S  σδ and that A α =π S  D α , whereπ S denotes the projection map fromE×StoS. (iii) Show that∩ α A α =π S  ∩ α  D α  and∩ α  D α ∈  K(E)×S  σδ . (iv) Without loss of generality suppose theE α spaces are disjoint— otherwise replaceE α by{α}×E α . DefineH=∪ α∈N E α and E ∗ :=H∪ {∞}. Without loss of generality suppose the metricd α onE α is bounded by 2 −α . Define d(x,y)=d(y,x):=  d α (x,y)ifx,y∈E α 2 −α +2 −β ifx∈E α ,y∈E β withα =β 2 −α ify=∞andx∈E α Show thatE ∗ is a compact metric space underd. (v) SupposeD α =∩ i∈N B αi withB αi ∈(K α ×S) σ . Show that∪ α D α = ∩ i ∪ α B α,i . Hint: Consider the intersection withE α ×S. (vi) Deduce that∪ α D α ∈ ( K(E ∗ )×S ) σδ . (vii) Conclude that∪ α A α =π S ∪ α D α ∈A(S). References Dellacherie, C. & Meyer, P. A. (1978),Probabilities and Potential, North- Holland, Amsterdam. (First of three volumes). Dudley, R. M. (1989),Real Analysis and Probability, Wadsworth, Belmont, Calif. Statistics 603a: 3 October 2004 c David Pollard
